Ipv6fb (#484)
opnsense/docs: source/manual/how-tos/ipv6_fb.rst

======================================
Configure IPv6 behind an AVM Fritz!Box
======================================
**Original Author:** Thomas Klein

------------
Introduction
------------

The `AVM Fritz!Box`, or FB for short, is a popular home router for
DSL, Cable and Fiber in Germany. This guide will setup an OPNSense
behind an FB, handover delegated prefixes from the provider and
configure local interfaces on the OPNSense to cope with dynamically changing IPv6 prefixes.

This guide is based on a Vodafone Cable connection (formerly Kabel-BW) and an
`AVM Fritz!Box Cable 6591` running `Fritz!OS 7.29`.

The settings presented here should work for most other dial-up scenarios and FB models
too. Just the size of the delegated subnet might differ.

------------
The Scenario
------------

We will configure a home network behind a common dial-up type ISP connection.
Our OPNsense has one interface pointing to the ISP, we call it `WAN`, and has three internal 

> interfaces called `DMZ`, `LAN` and `WLAN`. Each of those internal interfaces should get it's own 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interfaces called `DMZ`, `LAN` and `WLAN`. Each of those internal interfaces should get its own 
```

> subnet aka IPv6 präfix. This way we can easily control the dataflow on our OPNsense between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a /64 subnet from the IPv6 prefix. This way we can easily control the dataflow on our OPNsense between
```

all four segments. 

> Our dial-up ISP presents us a `/59` präfix, so we have enough bits left for easy subnetting.

Reviewer: Maybe this can be reworded that the **example** given here is with a /59 (that's a very strange ISP choice BTW).

```suggestion
Our dial-up ISP presents us a `/59` prefix, so we have enough bits left for easy subnetting.
```

------------------------------
Step 1 - prepare the Fritz!Box
------------------------------

The AVM website has a knowledge base article about the basic settings required on each FB model to enable IPv6 on client devices.
https://avm.de/service/wissensdatenbank/dok/FRITZ-Box-6591-cable/1239_IPv6-Subnetz-in-FRITZ-Box-einrichten/

> The crucial setting is the checkbox **allow other routers IPv6 präfixes**. Without that your delegated internal prefixes will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The crucial setting is the checkbox **allow other routers IPv6 prefixes**. Without that your delegated internal prefixes will
```

not be reachable from the Internet.

> Also, not stated in above document, I found it necessary to modify the **Internet - Permit Access** settings for

Reviewer: Technical documents avoid "I" as it makes the documentation opinionated and imprecise.

the OPNsense host. Make sure to select :menuselection:`Internet --> Permit Access -> <your OPN Host> --> IPv6 Settings --> Open firewall for delegated IPv6 prefixes of this device` in order to make your delegated
internal subnets available via Internet. 

------------------------------------
Step 2 - configure the WAN interface
------------------------------------

On OPNSense go to :menuselection:`Interfaces --> WAN` and set the configuration type for IPv6 to **DHCPv6**. On the bottom part of the dialog in
**DHCPv6 Client configuration** make sure to select 

* checkbox: **Request only an IPv6 prefix**
* checkbox: **Send IPv6 prefix hint**
* dropdown: **Prefix delegation size** in our example select `60`

Two things to notice here:

> 1. the prefix you are requesting has one bit more compared to what your ISP assigned the FB (60 vs. 59)

Reviewer: Actually it's one bit less in terms of addressing ;)

   your OPNsense as a router and really delegates a prefix. Your OPNSense will only get a link-local `0xfe80`
   address but that is fine. If you do not use this checkbox the FB considers your OPNsense as an end-user device
   and plainly refuses to delegate a prefix to your OPNsense. You end up with an valid IPv6 address but with `/64`
   netmask so nothing to delegate in your home net.

-------------------------------------------------
Step 3 - configure the DMZ / LAN / WLAN interface
-------------------------------------------------

Now it's time to setup your internal interfaces. The settings are more or less the same for all of them.
Instead of 'DHCPv6' you select 'Track Interface' and on the bottom IPv6 dialog choose the WAN interface to track.
This is also the place to divide your delegated prefix into distinct sub-nets. Just specify an idividual 'Interface prefix ID'
for each interface. In our example our FB gave us `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9410::/60` and we choose:

=========  ============  =======================
Interface  Interface ID  result-prefix
=========  ============  =======================

> DMZ        `0x01`        `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9411::`

Reviewer: Prefix 0 can be used as well, just FYI

WLAN       `0x02`        `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9412::`
LAN        `0x03`        `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9413::`
=========  ============  =======================

---------------------------------------------

> Step 3.1 - configure the Router Advertisments

Reviewer: This actually requires " Allow manual adjustment of DHCPv6 and Router Advertisements" in the respective interface settings.

```suggestion
Step 3.1 - configure the Router Advertisements
```

---------------------------------------------

With the new subnets in place it's time to configure the `Router Advertisments`. Not too much to configure here
as the defaults are already pretty good. 
For this guide i did choose the following settings:

===========================  ===========  =========================================================================
Setting                      Value        Comment
===========================  ===========  =========================================================================
Router Advertisements        Assissted    this gives us DHCPv6 and SLAAC
Router Priority              Normal       Default is high which would work too
Source Address               Automatic    the default
Advertise Default Gateway    checked      the default
Advertise Routes             empty  
DNS options                  empty        this gives away our OPNsense as DNS server with it's current dynamic IP's
===========================  ===========  =========================================================================

---------------------------------------

> Step 3.2 - configure the DHCPv6 service

Reviewer: This also requires " Allow manual adjustment of DHCPv6 and Router Advertisements" in the respective interface settings.

Advertise Default Gateway    checked      the default
Advertise Routes             empty  
DNS options                  empty        this gives away the OPNsense as DNS server with the current dynamic IP
===========================  ===========  ======================================================================

---------------------------------------
Step 3.2 - configure the DHCPv6 service
---------------------------------------

The clients would now be able to grab an IPv6 via SLAAC, find their router and get a DNS resolver but not all clients do
know SLAAC. Also there are valid reasons to assign fixed IPv6 address via DHCP to some clients for instance to make them available
from the Internet.

In :menuselection:`Services --> DHCPv6 --> [DMZ]` (and similar for the other interfaces) the DHCPv6 settings can be configured.
Initially the dynamically acquired subnet including the interface id and the available range is shown. 

Consider assigning a suitable address pool for DHCP client leases. The target range for the DMZ looks like
this: `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9411::1:0` --> `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9411::1:ffff`.

But wait! The prefix is dynamic. How to deal with that?

> Easy. Just omit the variable part and configure the DHCPv6 range to be
> `::1` --> `::ff`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Easy. Just omit the variable prefix and configure the DHCPv6 range to be `::1:0` --> `::1:ffff`
```

-----------------------------
Step 4 - setup Firewall rules
-----------------------------

By default outgoing traffic should already be possible but traffic from the Internet to the internal server needs a firewall rule.
There are different philosophies on how to manage firewall rules. Just use a similar strategy as with your IPv4 setup so rule management
is consistent.

Keep in mind that the `DMZ` / `LAN` / `WLAN` prefix is dynamic. The build-in macros like `DMZ net` will work for the whole network. 
But if you need a rule for a single server your should setup an alias pointing to your (fixed) DHCP IP and use this instead.

---------------
Troubleshooting
---------------

While discovering the specifics of IPv6 behind a FB in combination with OPNsense the first point of debugging was always
connecting via SSH to OPNsense on the CLI. 

In the directory `/tmp/` you will find several IPv6 related intermediate files. The most helpful here was `/tmp/<interfacename>_prefixv6`.
In this file you will find the prefix delegated to you by your upstream router. If you are behind an FB and this file does not exist chances

> are you forgot to seth the **Request only an IPv6 prefix** setting on the WAN interface.

Reviewer: The tool which handles these files is "ifctl" but I want to add a new mode for easier troubleshooting first before explaining it here. Thanks for the hint!

======================================
Configure IPv6 behind an AVM Fritz!Box
======================================
**Original Author:** Thomas Klein

------------
Introduction
------------

The `AVM Fritz!Box`, or FB for short, is a popular home router for
DSL, Cable and Fiber in Germany. This guide will setup a OPNSense
behind a FB, handover delegated prefixes from the provider and
configure local interfaces on the OPNSense to cope with dynamically changing IPv6 prefixes.

This guide is based on a Vodafone Cable connection (formerly Kabel-BW) and an
`AVM Fritz!Box Cable 6591` running `Fritz!OS 7.29`.

The settings presented here should work for most other dial-up scenarios and FB models
too. The size of the delegated subnet may differ.

------------
The Scenario
------------

This guide will configure a home network behind a common dial-up type ISP connection.

> The OPNsense has one interface pointing to the ISP, it is named `WAN`, and has three internal 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OPNsense has an interface pointing to the ISP named `WAN` and has three internal 
```

interfaces called `DMZ`, `LAN` and `WLAN`. Each of those internal interfaces will get a /64
subnet from the delegated IPv6 prefix. This way it is easy to control the dataflow between
all four segments on the OPNsense. 

In this example the dial-up ISP assigns a `/59` prefix to the FB, so there are enough bits left 
for subnetting in a SOHO setup. 

------------------------------
Step 1 - prepare the Fritz!Box
------------------------------

The AVM website has a knowledge base article about the basic settings required on each FB model to enable IPv6 on client devices.
https://avm.de/service/wissensdatenbank/dok/FRITZ-Box-6591-cable/1239_IPv6-Subnetz-in-FRITZ-Box-einrichten/
The crucial setting is the checkbox **allow other routers IPv6 prefixes**. Without that the delegated internal prefixes will
not be reachable from the Internet.

> Also, not stated in above document, it is necessary to modify the **Internet - Permit Access** settings for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, not stated in above document, it is possible to modify the **Internet - Permit Access** settings for
```

> the OPNsense host. Make sure to select :menuselection:`Internet --> Permit Access --> <your OPN Host> --> IPv6 Settings --> Open firewall for delegated IPv6 prefixes of this device`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the OPNsense host. Select :menuselection:`Internet --> Permit Access --> <your OPN Host> --> IPv6 Settings --> Open firewall for delegated IPv6 prefixes of this device`
```

On the OPNSense go to :menuselection:`Interfaces --> WAN` and set the configuration type for IPv6 to **DHCPv6**. On the bottom part of the dialog in
**DHCPv6 Client configuration** make sure to select 

* checkbox: **Request only an IPv6 prefix**
* checkbox: **Send IPv6 prefix hint**
* dropdown: **Prefix delegation size**. For this example setup select `60`

Two things to notice here:

1. the requested prefix differs by one bit compared to what the ISP delegated the FB (60 vs. 59)
2. the setting **Request only an IPv6 prefix** is the important part. 
   With this setting the FB acknowledges
   the OPNsense as a router and really delegates a prefix. The OPNSense will only get a link-local `0xfe80`
   address but that is fine. If this checkbox is not selected the FB considers the OPNsense as an end-user device
   and plainly refuses to delegate a prefix to it. The OPNsense end up with an valid IPv6 address but with `/64`
   netmask so nothing to delegate into the internal network.

-----------------------------------------------------------
Step 3 - configure the internal DMZ / LAN / WLAN interfaces
-----------------------------------------------------------

> Now it's time to setup the internal interfaces. The settings are more or less the same for all of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now it is time to set up the internal interfaces. The settings are more or less the same for all of them.
```

Router Priority              Normal       Default is high which would work too
Source Address               Automatic    the default
Advertise Default Gateway    checked      the default
Advertise Routes             empty  
DNS options                  empty        this gives away the OPNsense as DNS server with the current dynamic IP
===========================  ===========  ======================================================================

---------------------------------------
Step 3.2 - configure the DHCPv6 service
---------------------------------------

The clients would now be able to grab an IPv6 via SLAAC, find their router and get a DNS resolver but not all clients do
know SLAAC. Also there are valid reasons to assign fixed IPv6 address via DHCP to some clients for instance to make them available
from the Internet.

In :menuselection:`Services --> DHCPv6 --> [DMZ]` (and similar for the other interfaces) the DHCPv6 settings can be configured.
Initially the dynamically acquired subnet including the interface id and the available range is shown. 

For most SOHO setups 256 clients per network zone will probably more than enough so we restrict the range for the DMZ to

> `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9411::1` --> `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9411::ff`

Reviewer: I'm not sure about recommending this. 256 is never enough. Companies fall into this trap all the time.

I'd rather suggest a range `::1:0` to `::1:ffff` which has two benefits: segmented DHCP range and enough room to grow. Ok?

Author: Ok I was thinking SOHO (Small Office, Home Office) but sure go ahead and use ffff instead. Fine with me.

Reviewer: We can't avoid companies reading and doing this anyway :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider assigning a suitable address pool for DHCP client leases. The target range for the DMZ looks like
this: `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9411::1:0` --> `aaaa:bbbb:cccc:9411::1:ffff`.
```

> But wait! The prefix is dynamic isn't it ? How to deal with that ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But wait! The prefix is dynamic. How to deal with that?
```

Easy. Just omit the variable part and configure the DHCPv6 range to be

> `::1` --> `::ff`

Reviewer: Just for the record the first address is usable so `::` is perfectly fine.

Author: Agree but for historical reasons I'm not a fan of using = or 255 in IP addresses even though it's fine in IPv4 if you know what you are doing.

Reviewer: But is it ok to use for dynamic DHCP pool in your opinion?

Author: Same as with the :ff vs :ffff thing. It's a valid setting and so why not use it. But if I think about the target audience for this HowTo I would avoid as many pitfalls as possible. I consider myself pretty good at networking and fair in IPv6 and personally I would still avoid the 'empty' :: and use ::1 instead - it's just clearer. There are many adresses out there. Do we really need to squeeze out the last drop ?

Yes this guide will be read by company admins too but in the end it's about putting a network behind a FritzBox which is a typical home office device. 

But I also agree that this guide gives way more hints on setting up IPv6 on OPNSense in general than just telling a user how to configure the FritzBox.

I leave this up to you. I can live with either wording. Main focus should be to get a good guide out there so others have way less issues getting their network behind the FB up and running with IPv6 than I had.

Reviewer: I see where your reservations come from yet we are in a continuous pool within the /64 so ::1:0 is neither the first address nor ::1:ffff would be the last. It's the same for IPv4 with a /16 where 10.0.1.0 and 10.0.1.255 both work fine since forever and it's not any particular magic. I'm specifically not talking about the network and broadcast address.

Author: As I said - fine with me. Maybe I simply have to get a bit more used to all the new possibilities IPv6 brings along.

OPNSense will automatically prefix this pattern with the dynamically acquired prefix.

> Repeat for all the other subnets. Don't forget to configure the `Domain search list` to match the SOHO internal DNS domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repeat for all the other subnets. Do not forget to configure the `Domain search list` to match the SOHO internal DNS domain.
```

-----------------------------
Step 4 - setup Firewall rules
-----------------------------

> All clients should now have a proper IPv6 address (actually more than one), know their DNS server(s) and their upstream router.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All clients should now have a proper IPv6 address (actually more than one), know their DNS servers and their upstream router.
```

> All thats left to do is adding the appropriate firewall rules. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All that is left to do is adding the appropriate firewall rules. 
```

> All clients should now have a proper IPv6 address (actually more than one), know their DNS servers and their upstream router.
> All that is left to do is adding the appropriate firewall rules for incoming traffic.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

better zap this to reduce redundancy
